ARC56: Extended App Description (#258)
algorandfoundation/ARCs: ARCs/arc-draft_extended_desc.md

---
arc: <to be assigned>
title: Extended App Description
description: Adds more information to the ARC4 JSON description
author: Joe Polny (@joe-p)
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ARC
created: 2023-11-14
requires: 4
---

## Abstract
This ARC takes the existing JSON description of a contract as described in ARC4 and adds more fields for the purpose of client interaction

## Motivation
The description provided by ARC4 is missing a lot of critical information that clients should know when interaction with an app.

## Specification
```ts
/** Mapping of named structs to the ABI type of their fields */

> interface StructFields {

Reviewer: This one is an associative array, but all of the other things seem to be arrays with objects that have a name property. Should we be consistent?

Author: I'm not sure I follow, what do you mean?

Reviewer: i.e. this one is:

```
{
   fieldName: ...
}
```

rather than the others parts of the spec that are:

```
[{name: "fieldName", ...}]
```

>   [name: string]: string | StructFields;

Reviewer: I quite liked this in the definition of arc-32, it all boilds down to string, but it makes it quite explicit what the string represents:

```typescript
/** The name of a field */
export type FieldName = string

/** The string name of an ABI type */
export type ABIType = string

/** The elements of the struct/tuple: `FieldName`, `ABIType` */
export type StructElement = [FieldName, ABIType]
```

Reviewer: Side-note: looks like previous implementation didn't allow nesting, but this does, which is presumably fine?

Reviewer: (Noting previously it was `[FieldName, ABIType]`, but now we are doing an associative array, so that part isn't right.)

}

/** Describes a single key in app storage */

> interface StorageKey {

Reviewer: This should have a `description` field too.

Also, is `StorageKey` the right name? Should it be `StorageItem`?

Author: I use Key vs Map to differentiate between a single key-value pair and a mapping of key-value pairs. I'm open to other names but for what its worth this is the naming I use in TEALScript

Author: Added `desc` in a18a968a16f3bb272c5da8d8e8d90f18eddb7ab8. I went with `desc` because that's what's already used by ARC4 and figured it would be kinda weird to have `desc` some places and `description` in others

  /** The type of the key. Can be ABI type or named struct */

>   keyType: string;

Reviewer: Wonder if this should be `[FieldName, ABIType]` like above suggestion?

>   keyType: string;

Reviewer: I'm confused about what `keyType` is vs `valueType`?

Author: If you have a mapping `address` => `uint64`, the `keyType` would be `address` and the `valueType` would be `uint64`

  /** The type of the value. Can be ABI type or named struct */

>   valueType: string;

Reviewer: Wonder if this should be `StructName | ABIType` or similar?

Also, previously we had avm type, do we need to support that too / instead? Having the proper type would be awesome because it's an annoying limitation of the current stuff.

Author: > Wonder if this should be StructName | ABIType or similar?

Yeah I like that. Will make the change. 

> Also, previously we had avm type, do we need to support that too / instead? Having the proper type would be awesome because it's an annoying limitation of the current stuff.

Initially I was thinking it wasn't necessary because it's obvious when one is using uint64 vs ABI uint64, but we do need a way to specifcy AVM bytes (no prefix) vs ABI bytes. i'll add AVMType as well.

Author: I added `AVMBytes` type in a18a968a16f3bb272c5da8d8e8d90f18eddb7ab8. I don't think uint64 is needed because it's always going to be obvious when AVM uint64 is used (only top-level values in global/local)

  /** The key itself, as a byte array */

>   key: number[];

Reviewer: Rather than a byte array should it instead be base64, or utf-8

}

> interface StorageMap {

Reviewer: This needs `description` too

  /** The type of the key. Can be ABI type or named struct */
  keyType: string;
  /** The type of the value. Can be ABI type or named struct */
  valueType: string;
  /** The prefix of the map, as a string */
  prefix: string;
}

interface Method {
  /** The name of the method */
  name: string;
  /** Optional, user-friendly description for the method */
  desc?: string;
  /** The arguments of the method, in order */

>   args: Array<{

Reviewer: Do we need default arguments?

Author: I purposefully left them out because I have never seen them used nor has anyone tried to use them or asked about them. I'm not totally against it though

Reviewer: I've seen them used and think they are helpful. They are also implemented in algokit utils and typed clients.

    /** The type of the argument */
    type: string;
    /** If the type is a struct, the name of the struct */
    struct?: string;
    /** Optional, user-friendly name for the argument */
    name?: string;
    /** Optional, user-friendly description for the argument */
    desc?: string;
  }>;
  /** Information about the method's return value */
  returns: {
    /** The type of the return value, or "void" to indicate no return value. */

>     type: string;

Reviewer: Should we do the `ABIType | 'struct'` type thing?

    /** If the type is a struct, the name of the struct */

>     struct?: string;

Reviewer: If we are doing this pattern of `struct` for type and then struct name separate we should probably do that consistently in the other places that take a struct?

Author: The reason I had it separated here and not in other places is to maintain ARC4 backwards compatibility.

    /** Optional, user-friendly description for the return value */
    desc?: string;
  };
  /** an action is a combination of call/create and an OnComplete */
  actions: {
    /** OnCompeltes this method allows when appID === 0 */
    create: ('NoOp' | 'OptIn' | 'DeleteApplication')[];
    /** OnCompeltes this method allows when appID !== 0 */
    call: ('NoOp' | 'OptIn' | 'CloseOut' | 'ClearState' | 'UpdateApplication' | 'DeleteApplication')[];
  };

>   readonly: boolean;

Reviewer: Should this be `readOnly` or `readonly`?

Author: `readonly` as per ARC22

}

> interface Contract {

Reviewer: Given this is the driving interface suggest this is added at the top of the code snippet, possibly also worth having a comment to indicate this is an extension of ARC4?

Author: Added comments in a18a968a16f3bb272c5da8d8e8d90f18eddb7ab8. I used this ordering because it ensures that any interface is described before it's actually used, which makes more sense to me but happy to change it if others feel otherwise.

Reviewer: I think it's a bit hard to comprehend right now. I'd advocate for splitting it out into multiple definitions and indicate with narrative that the definitions are further down the page.

  /** A user-friendly name for the contract */
  name: string;
  /** Optional, user-friendly description for the interface */

>   desc?: string;

Reviewer: Given we are taking the opportunity to rejig things can we use `description` rather than `desc` or `descr`. `description` is a pretty standard property name e.g. things like json schema, and I think abbreviations and acronyms obscure understandability, particular for non-native english speakers.

Reviewer: (Noting this would be a breaking change against ARC4 unfortunately, maybe we can support either so we can move forward, but have backwards compatibility?)

Author: Because this would be such a minor change in the grand scheme of things I'm not really sure it would be worth adding extra complexity/breaking backwards compatability

Reviewer: Happy for it to stay with arc4 status quo, but if we didn't want to take a stance towards more broadly understandable language it's a now or never moment.

  /**
   * Optional object listing the contract instances across different networks
   */
  networks?: {
    /**
     * The key is the base64 genesis hash of the network, and the value contains
     * information about the deployed contract in the network indicated by the
     * key
     */

>     [network: string]: {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [network: 'mainnet' | 'testnet' | 'betanet' | string]: {
```

Reviewer: Current one is base64 genesis hash, but I feel like we should support the more understandable short-hand?

Side-note: just realised this is part of ARC-0004. I've never seen anyone use this, it's a bit tricky if you are auto-generating the json file to include stateful data like this. We also don't currently support it in algokit utils, although if we want to support it we should add that! This would be handy when third parties like oracles are distributing a file.

Author: Part of the rationale for the base64 is that is allows one to accurately describe a private network. We could have a separate entry for public networks though, but because this is so seldomly used I'm not sure if it'd really be worth it.

Reviewer: My suggestion above still has `string` so the implementation would be it's either base64 or one of the special known network names. It would make it a lot easier to use this feature.

Reviewer: This is minor though happy if it's left out.

      /** The app ID of the deployed contract in this network */

>       appID: number;

Reviewer: Worth adding in the AlgoKit format as well as another option? i.e. creator address + name

Author: I'm trying to think how this could be done in a way that is ARC4 backwards compatible. Don't want to omit appID because that could break an ARC4 client if it tries to use that field (no clients in existence use it that I know of, but just want to be safe)

Reviewer: If nothing actually uses this right now then I think it's OK to mess with it and note is as a known deviation from ARC4?

Again, pretty minor feature though.

Reviewer 2: If possible, since we tried to keep ARC4 backward compatibility, I would not pursue this minor deviation. I think declaring the association between `appID` and the Network ID on which the App is deployed has some value.

    };
  };
  /** Named structs use by the application */

>   structs: StructFields;

Reviewer: I like how this is pulled out to a single place

  /** All of the methods that the contract implements */
  methods: Method[];

>   state: {

Reviewer: I like how `state` is one entry with everything together 👌

    schema: {
      global: {

>         ints: number;

Reviewer: ARC-32 has `num_uints` / `num_byte_slices`; I like the simplicity of this though, but is it problematic it's less obvious from the name it's a count? I think it's probably fine, but wanted to raise the question.

We should add typedoc comments for them...

Author: Added comments in a18a968a16f3bb272c5da8d8e8d90f18eddb7ab8

        bytes: number;
      };
      local: {
        ints: number;
        bytes: number;
      };
    };
    /** Describes single key-value pairs in the application's state */

>     keys: {

Reviewer: Previous one had reserved and declared values, I've honestly never used reserved, but I guess it makes sense where you want to have an upgradeable contract that preallocates more storage than it currently needs?

Author: I didn't make a differentiation between reserved and declared because schema is immutable, thus it would make sense to always just use the max amount of state when creating the app (declared + reserved). 

> Same re: static that was there previously, do we need it?

I don't see static in ARC32 itself. How is it used?

      global: StorageKey[];
      local: StorageKey[];
      box: StorageKey[];
    };
    /** Describes key-value maps in the application's state */
    maps: {
      global: StorageMap[];
      local: StorageMap[];
      box: StorageMap[];
    };
  };

> }

Reviewer: Do we need source or bare call config?

Author: > source
Yes forgot about that. 

> bare call config?
Yes we probably should, although as a sidenote I think we should encourage developers to avoid using bare calls as much as possible because I've learnt they can be rather confusing to new developers.

Reviewer: Fair, but naturally they are still useful for advanced scenarios so we should expose it

```

> ## Rationale

Reviewer: Is this and "Motivation" the same thing?

Reviewer: Right, makes sense

> ARC32 essentially addresses the samr problem, but it requires the generation of two seperate JSON files (and ARC32 contains entirely redundant information). The goal of this ARC is to create one JSON schema that is backwards compatible with ARC4 clients. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ARC32 essentially addresses the same problem, but it requires the generation of two separate JSON files and the ARC32 JSON file contains the ARC4 JSON file within it (redundant information). The goal of this ARC is to create one JSON schema that is backwards compatible with ARC4 clients, but contains the relevant information needed to automatically generate comprehensive client experiences.
```
